------------------------ Submission 114, Review 3 ------------------------

Title: Guiding Deep Brain Stimulation Interventions by Fusing Multimodal Uncertainty Regions

Reviewer:           primary

Summary of all reviews from the Primary Reviewer

  While the reviewers generally appreciated the significance of the
  considered application and the care with which the system was designed
  and integrated in the clinical workflow, they raised some important
  questions about key aspects of the method and its evaluation by domain
  experts. In particular, they found that the topics of fused visualization
  and uncertainty lacked depth and clarity in the paper, despite the
  prominent role that these aspects were supposed to play. More generally,
  they found that the technical objectives were not stated clearly enough
  to help the reader assess the proposed contribution. There was a general
  sense that the evaluation lacked a clear assessment of the main features
  of the system, in particular the integration of MER in the visualization,
  and that the benefits of this system in the clinical setting were not
  well documented. 

  Overall, the paper received mix reviews and is somewhat of a borderline
  case. However, I ultimately think that the strengths of the paper
  outweigh (ever so slightly) the negative and I would therefore lean
  toward accepting the paper.

  Specifically:
  1. clarify the technical objectives 
  2. explain more fully the relationship between the objectives and the
  contributions. 
  3. provide a clear assessment of the main features of your system
  4. clarify the benefits of this system in the clinical setting. 

Recommendation from the Primary Reviewer 

  4  (Probably accept)

Expertise

  3  (Knowledgeable)

The Review 

  The paper is very well written and self-contained despite its very
  specialized nature. This is a system contribution that the authors have
  motivated in the context of current practice. Lacking expertise in this
  domain I am unable to assess the novelty of some of these contributions
  but it transpires from the description that the system incorporates a
  number of state of the art visualization techniques to ensure the
  effectiveness of the system in a clinical setting. 

  The main weakness of the paper (unfortunately) appears to lie in the
  evaluation of the system. The expert user feedback on the benefit of MER
  integration appears somewhat underwhelming. Since it transpires from the
  introduction that the integration of this modality in the workflow of
  neurosurgeons is a primary contribution of this method, this seems
  problematic. In any case, it would be helpful to provide more insight
  into the reasons behind this lack of enthusiasm for this approach.

Overall Rating

  4  (Probably accept: I would argue for accepting this paper.)


------------------------ Submission 114, Review 1 ------------------------

Title: Guiding Deep Brain Stimulation Interventions by Fusing Multimodal Uncertainty Regions

Reviewer:           external

Expertise

  2  (Passing Knowledge)

The Review 

  The manuscript "Guiding Deep Brain Stimulation Interventions by Fusing
  Multimodal Uncertainty Regions" presents a system for integrated
  visualization of head CT and brain MRI data, along with microelectrode
  recordings (MER), for use in planning and performing surgery for deep
  brain stimulation. The system is fully implemented and has been evaluated
  by showing it to five neurosurgeons and having them fill out a short
  questionnaire.

  Strengths of this paper include:

   - The design seems to tightly follow the clinical workflow.
   - The design decisions are plausibly motivated.
   - Unlike in similar systems (such as [21]), results from MER are
  directly integrated.
   - The authors make an effort to consider uncertainty in their
  visualization.
   - Results have been shown to several neurosurgeons.

  Weaknesses of this paper are that:

   - Potentially, the target closeup visualization, which includes the
  "fusing of multimodal uncertainty regions" from the paper title, could be
  the most important contribution. Unfortunately, Fig.6 seems rather
  confusing to me, and the text in Sec.3.4.1 does not make it easy to
  understand how this visualization would contribute to a more accurate
  localization in practice. In the evaluation sheet, either the
  neurosurgeons were not asked about this central part of the system, or
  the authors decided not to report this question and its answers.
   - Similarly, the benefits from including MER are not fully evaluated.
  Only 3 out of 5 neurosurgeons agreed that integrating this information
  was helpful, and they were not asked if they agreed with the specific way
  this information was visualized (using the thresholded disks embedded in
  the 3D view).
   - The neurosurgeons were asked to compare the system to their "old
  system", but it does not become clear to the reader what the features of
  that "old system" are.
   - The user interface seems rather complex - several parameters are left
  for "manual adjustment" by the user, and it is unclear if the surgery
  team will have the time for that during the intervention.
   - The authors state that the system should "reduce the cognitive load"
  of the surgeon, but the specific benefits expected from the system are
  not described in large enough detail. Is the system expected to make the
  intervention faster (despite the described complexity in using it)?
  Should it lead to higher success rates (if so, are there clinical studies
  that indicate how many such interventions fail any why)?

  Overall, I decided to rate this manuscript as "borderline"; given that
  PacificVis does not expect journal level contributions, I have a slight
  tendency towards acceptance.

  Additional comments:

  A more common visualization term for the "beads" would by "glyphs".

  Typos:

  p.1: saggital -> sagittal
  p.2: provie -> provide
  p.3: begin -> being

Overall Rating

  3  (Borderline: Overall I would not argue for accepting this paper.)


------------------------ Submission 114, Review 2 ------------------------

Title: Guiding Deep Brain Stimulation Interventions by Fusing Multimodal Uncertainty Regions

Reviewer:           external

Expertise

  2  (Passing Knowledge)

The Review 

  The authors describe a system to guide deep brain stimulation therapy by
  providing multiple views and audio data to aid the doctor in placing the
  electrodes.

  Overall rating:
  The paper presents a system that contains many interesting tools to
  display data during surgery. The main problem I see with this paper is
  that, being a systems description, it does not provide enough content
  about the usability of various parts of the system. The descriptions of
  the individual parts seem sound, even though the authors do not provide a
  lot of detail and, therefore, limited technical novelty is contained in
  the paper.
  One major drawback of the paper, which influenced my decision is the
  fact, that the quality of the interventions is not measured. Neither in
  the testing phase at the end of the paper, nor evaluated in the technical
  description. This is especially due to the fact that a high accuracy is
  claimed to be mandatory (approx. 1mm), where most measurements provided
  during the surgery typically do not provide this accuracy in the
  measurement.

  Therefore, I leaning towards not accepting the paper but could be
  convinced if some of my questions are answered in the final version.


  Detailed comments:

  Even thought the title talks about uncertain regions, I think this fact
  is underrepresented in the system. It is mentioned that the segmentation
  is "uncertain" as the brain shifted, but the brain is captured several
  times during the surgery using CT to recalibrate all devices.

  Section 3.2.1: "As MRI has a low signal-to-noise ratio, gradient-based
  shading is not viable when visualizing the brain.": In my experience,
  especially T1 images have a reasonable SNR and can be used easily for
  volume representations, especially because in most cases, iso surfaces
  can be computed and have shown to be stable enough.

  "We present the access path to the surgeon by removing the structures
  around the trajectory"
  I am not sure whether removing the structure around the access path is
  provides enough guidance. As far as I know, the access path is usually
  identified using the local structures, which would have been removed in
  this case. Please clarify.



  Given the number of different views presented to the surgeon, it would be
  of interest to see a study on which view is actually used in which stage
  of the surgery. Even though an eye tracking study may reveal interesting
  results, monitoring the surgeon closely may give initial hints on which
  data is actually important.

  This goes along with the performed tests. It would be nice to have a
  comparison of the responses of the test candidates to the actual
  performance when using the system compared to existing systems.

  Especially the response to the question "The tools provided by the system
  are easy to use" is seems to be an honest reply, but to make use of this
  answer, it would be nice to have possible improvements in that regard
  stated in the paper as well as what people miss in their old system that
  makes them want to use this new system "in addition" instead of as a
  replacement to the existing systems they have.



Overall Rating

  3  (Borderline: Overall I would not argue for accepting this paper.)


------------------------ Submission 114, Review 4 ------------------------

Title: Guiding Deep Brain Stimulation Interventions by Fusing Multimodal Uncertainty Regions

Reviewer:           secondary

Expertise

  3  (Knowledgeable)

The Review 

  This paper presents an important application problem and a practical
  solution. The focus is the fusion of data of different modalities in
  surgical planning, and the most difficult modality to deal with is
  perhaps MER. The paper is well-written, and easy to read. It also contain
  an evaluation section. For such an application, this evaluation is
  adequate as we should not expect neurosurgeons to spend more time to do
  our "evaluation" as demanded by the VisWeek protocol for a design
  study/application paper. Quality of a process does not assure the quality
  of a piece of work. 

  However, there is some scope to improve the paper.

  1. I would like to see more discussions on fused visualization. In my
  view, only Figure 7 strictly quality as fused uncertainty visualization,
  while Figure 5 seems to focus on MER only (though the word fusing is
  used). Figure 6 seems to be a fused visualization, but I am not sure
  where is uncertainty.

  2. Although the title has a phrase "Fusing Multimodal Uncertainty
  Regions", the paper seems unsure about what exactly it tries to do. Is it
  about fusing different modalities as in Figure 6 (through I am not sure
  if all mentioned modalities are there)? Is it about the fusion of
  different uncertainty values (as in Figure 7). Is it about fusing
  different aspects of MER data as in Figure 5.

  3. It is also not clear if the authors try to claim novelty from a
  perspective of an application system or a set of apparently uncoordinated
  views or visual designs in the paper. In fact, the first part of the
  video shows a reasonable coordinated set of 4 views. Why not add such an
  image (or even better screenshot) into the paper? 

  It is an exciting application. The video is reasonably good. I would like
  the paper to take us through different stages in the surgical planning to
  show us how different views are used, and ideally through the same
  system. Are the two parts of video from the same system?

  I would score the paper 3.5.






Overall Rating

  4  (Probably accept: I would argue for accepting this paper.)