Vis (SciVis) 2012

Reviews of submission #103: "Supporting Deep Brain Stimulation
Interventions by Fusing Microelectrode Recordings with Imaging Data"

------------------------ Submission 103, Review 1 ------------------------

Reviewer:           primary

Second Round Recommendation

   

Second Round Review Text


Summary Rating

   3  (<b>Maybe reject:</b> This paper may not be acceptable without major  changes.)

Summary Review (1st review cycle)

   My overall recommendation is based on the verbal comments in the reviews
   and also reflect the numerical evaluation with an
     average of 3.25.

   The reviewers agree that some parts of the paper are too long and contain
   too much detail making it difficult to get the essential points. With
   respect to significance and novelty, the reviewers do not agree
   completely. One reviewer raised the problem that the requirement analysis
   is not deep enough to justify all design
     decisions (a crucial argument for an application paper) and two
   reviewers see the novelty as very limited, in particular,
     since many other systems provide multimodal visualization and there is
   no substantial comparison of the new method to existing one's. I consider
   the discussion on significance and novelty as the core of the problem.

   The reviewers do not fully agree on the evaluation. Clearly, the
   evaluation does not show that the system is clinically useful and
   effective. Thus, it is not clear that the goal stated in the introduction
   is reached. The authors chose a pragmatic
     approach evaluating those aspects that could be easily evaluated.
   However, a realistic
     test in surgery is very difficult to organize. 

   Having said this, I think that the problems stated before (alone) require
   a major not a minor revision. In particular the following arguments
   (citations from the reviews) are essential to me.

     "I would have expected a more clear analysis and formulation of the
     requirements. What information should be exactly delivered by the
     visualization in each phase? The canal view for instance is quite
     unmotivated ..."
      
     "The visual design of the novel parts is problematic. First, fusing the
   spatial orientation and layout of the recording electrodes with the
     temporal signal is misleading, since the sizes of the discs in 3D space
   cannot accurately convey the amplitude information of the electric
     signals."

     "First, compare with existing multi-modal DBS visualization systems, in
   my opinion, the proposed system does not show any significant
   improvement.
     The only difference as pointed out by the authors in the related work
     section is the incorporation of patient checks data, which is very
     straightforward."

Type of Paper

   Application / Design Study

Novelty

   Weakly advocate for

Significance

   Weakly advocate for

Significance/Novelty: Rating Justification

   This particular and very specific problem was certainly not tackled in
   such depth before. Deep Brain Stimulation is a frequent procedure and
   gains importance among others because the underlying pathology occurs
   more often but also due a proven benefit with rather low adverse effects.
   How often the very specific settings with MER recordings is applied,
   whether it is feasible to apply it more broadly or whether this is a
   rather rare treatment choice is not clear to me.

Significance/Novelty: How To Improve? 

   Better explain how often this procedure with the specific signals occurs.

Exposition and Detail

   Somewhat

Exposition and Detail: How To Improve?

   I do not understand how a slice view of voxel data (Sect. 4.2.1) may be
   used to determine the target location at sub-voxel accuracy. Without any
   really smart tricks, there is only voxel information available. So what
   is the trick to achieve a super-resolution that is not actually there.

   In Sect. 4.4.3 it is first said that the uncertainty margin is set to
   zero and letter it is explained why such a margin ins relevant. 

Paper Length

   Sect. 4.3.2 and 4.4.3 are rather long, the latter even more. These might
   be written more concise and at the same time essential information should
   be emphasized. In particular Sect. 4.4.3 needs some structuring elements,
   such as paragraphs, lists, tables or at least emphasized words - so far
   it is a long narrative without an obvious structure.

Limitations and Drawbacks

   A few minor problems: 
   In Fig. 2, the number 1, 2, 3 are unnecessarily large and the small
   images are too small.

   Sect. 2 "based on a region-based segmentation" -> employs?

   Sect. 4.2.2: the constant present -> presence?

   Sect. 4.3.2: the sentence with " ... which introduces a lot of visual
   clutter ..." is very redundant (we all know without further explanation
   that visual clutter is not a desired state).

   4.3.2: draws preattentive attention -> that is not possible. I would omit
   the "preattentive"


Method Evaluation 

   The authors performed an informal evaluation. They had real users, namely
   five neurosurgeons actually performing DBS. That is a strong aspect and
   it is certainly not possible to get more of these specialized users. The
   evaluation focussed on usability and usefulness. It is not a particularly
   deep evaluation (that would require actual clinical use and thus poses a
   number of challenges), but it is sufficient to assess the value.

References

   There are many references. Some of them are not necessary. [1,2,3] are
   used only once and together. Reference 11 is also not necessary. That the
   integration of biomedical data is useful is too obvious and [11] is
   probably not a particularly important paper to clarify this.

   The related work section is very well written and useful.

Final Judgment: Overall rating

   4  (<b>Probably accept:</b> This paper will be acceptable with minor changes.)

Final Judgment: Justification

   The paper represents a substantial piece of application-oriented research
   and development in medical visualization. The paper is in general well
   written and the whole work seems to be mature. Also most aspects are
   tailored to the very specific problem and are as such not very useful,
   except you consider the same problems, some aspects are more general. The
   contextual view presented in Fig. 5 and some considerations on access
   planning are more widely relevant.

Ultimate Judgment

   top 25%

Expertise

   3  (Expert)

------------------------ Submission 103, Review 4 ------------------------

Reviewer:           secondary

Type of Paper

   Application / Design Study

Novelty

   Weakly advocate for

Significance

   Weakly advocate for

Significance/Novelty: Rating Justification

   This paper presents a pretty complete application system for deep brain
   stimulation interventions through fusing microelectrode recordings with
   MRI/CT scanned 3D volumes. The major contribution of this application
   paper is to cleverly convert the temporal varying MER signal into spatial
   singles and then integrated into an interactive visualization. The
   similar approaches can be taken for other similar situations. On the
   other side, the techniques presented in the paper are not very difficult
   and most are well established in visualization.

Significance/Novelty: How To Improve? 

   This work is closely related to the medical practice. Any concrete
   evidence on real usage can improve the work.

Exposition and Detail

   Somewhat

Exposition and Detail: How To Improve?

   The major novel part of this paper is the part of spatial audio
   visualization. More elaboration on how the original recorded signals are
   resembled and converted should be provided. It is also possible that
   improper sample may result in misrepresentation of the original signal.

Paper Length

   OK this part.

Limitations and Drawbacks


Method Evaluation 

   The evaluation of this work was carried out through a questionnaire with
   several neurosurgeons after they watch the show case of the system. It is
   preferable that the system can be evaluated in real operation by the
   neurosurgeons. Of course it is understandable that the difficulties to
   obtain permit in clinical trial make such evaluation not easy to conduct.

References

   Looks sufficient

Final Judgment: Overall rating

   3  (<b>Borderline:</b> This paper might be acceptable with major  changes.)

Final Judgment: Justification

   This work presents a fairly complete application system. The choices of
   visualization techniques are reasonable. Major innovation is the part to
   convert the temporal signals of the probes to spatial signals. The
   spatial audio visualization is interesting. On the other hand, such
   system is very specific to such special type of application. So it may
   only have limited impact to inspire other application or research.

Ultimate Judgment

   top 50%

Expertise

   2  (Knowledgable)

------------------------ Submission 103, Review 2 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external

Type of Paper

   Application / Design Study

Novelty

   Strongly advocate against  

Significance

   Strongly advocate against 

Significance/Novelty: Rating Justification

   This work is an incremental improvement over existing work. Compared to
   existing systems such as Cicerone, this system incorporates patient
   checks data into their system, which, in my opinion, is rather an
   incremental improvement. The electrode closeup may be new. However, this
   view is very confusing. I don't think it is an effective design
   considering the almost indistinguishable colors and very misleading
   transparency used. 

Significance/Novelty: How To Improve? 

   The closeup view may have the potential. The authors may further explore
   how to effective visualize the overlapping regions rather than using
   arbitrary colors and transparency to visualize the regions. One possible
   way may be to unfold the 3D overlapping region to a 2D plane (or by
   projection) for more accurate and unambiguous visualization.

Exposition and Detail

   Absolutely

Exposition and Detail: How To Improve?

   The exposition is clear since the techniques used are simple and
   straightforward. 

Paper Length

   The paper is too long. It should be shortened considering its
   contributions.

Limitations and Drawbacks

   1.	The techniques used in the paper are simple and not new. Additionally,
   compared with existing DBS multi-modal visualization systems, the system
   does not show a significant improvement. The only new part is the
   incorporation of patient test information into the system, which is
   straightforward. 

   2.	The visual design of the novel parts is problematic. First, fusing the
   spatial orientation and layout of the recording electrodes with the
   temporal signal is misleading, since the sizes of the discs in 3D space
   cannot accurately convey the amplitude information of the electric
   signals. The misinterpretation of the electric signals may cause
   undesired consequences. Second, the design of the Electrode Closeup is
   also quite ineffective because of the arbitrary use of the colors and
   transparency. The colors such as blue and purple are very difficult to be
   differentiated. In addition, I don’t think the semi-transparent
   overlapping regions (which are difficult to distinguish) can effectively
   reveal the desired information.

   3.	The evaluation is another major issue of the paper. It is far from
   enough to demonstrate the usefulness and effectiveness of the system.
   Directly evaluating the entire system by questionnaire is ineffective and
   may hide the serious problem from the participants. One better to do the
   user study is to separate the system into individual component views and
   ask the participants to evaluate the individual views rather than the
   entire system. After that, the entire system can be evaluated.
   Furthermore, the feedback is unconvincing because the participants did
   not use the system by themselves.

Method Evaluation 

   The provided evaluation is far from sufficient. Too short to provide any
   valuable insight from the design study. It would be better to start the
   evaluation by testing individual views and finally evaluate the entire
   system. Furthermore, the evaluation is unconvincing because the
   participants did not use the system by themselves.

References

   First, the references to multi-modal volume visualization are incomplete.
   While there are numerous techniques that have been proposed in recent
   years, the paper only reviews a few ones. Additionally, they do not
   thoroughly compare their approach with the existing work. As the system
   is a typical multi-modal volume visualization system, it would be
   important to clearly indicate in the paper how the multi-modal
   visualization techniques used in the work can be distinguished from the
   existing techniques.

Final Judgment: Overall rating

   2  ( <b>Probably reject:</b> This paper is not ready for publication even with major changes.)

Final Judgment: Justification

   The paper describes a multi-modal volume visualization system to
   facilitate deep brain simulation interventions. The claimed contributions
   include a multi-modal visualization system, a fusing approach of MER data
   with spatial data, and a user study. However, I have serious concerns
   about these claimed contributions.

   First, compare with existing multi-modal DBS visualization systems, in my
   opinion, the proposed system does not show any significant improvement.
   The only difference as pointed out by the authors in the related work
   section is the incorporation of patient checks data, which is very
   straightforward and cannot be considered as novel. Additionally, the
   multi-modal visualization techniques used in the system are quite simple.
   I don’t think there is sufficient novelty in the paper from either the
   technique or the application aspect.

   Second, the fusing approach of MER data with spatial data (as shown in
   Figure 8) is very trivial. What makes worse is that the design of showing
   the amplitude of MER signals in 3D is ineffective. Using the sizes of 3D
   discs cannot accurately encode the MER signals due to the perspective
   projection of volume rendering. The relative sizes between different
   discs in 3D perceived by a user may be totally different from their real
   relative sizes.

   Third, the evaluation is unconvincing and incomplete. This part is too
   short to reveal any insight from the design. It does not convey much
   valuable information using this kind of questionnaire evaluation. First,
   it is very likely that the evaluation of the system as whole hides the
   serious problems from the participants. Second, the participants actually
   did not use the system. They just saw how the authors used and showcased
   the system. Without using this system, it is unlikely that the
   participants could know the system well. Thus, I don’t think their
   feedback is convincing.

Ultimate Judgment

   

Expertise

   3  (Expert)

------------------------ Submission 103, Review 3 ------------------------

Reviewer:           external

Type of Paper

   Application / Design Study

Novelty

   Strongly advocate for

Significance

   Strongly advocate for

Significance/Novelty: Rating Justification

   The paper is a well motivated and quite complete application paper/design
   study for a system supporting Deep Brain Stimulation Interventions.
   Although there already exist already a system (Cicerone) to support such
   interventions several novel intervention specific visualization
   techniques have been developed. 
   Special attention is given to the fusion of images, measurements and
   annotations into a common and informative visual representation of the
   current intra-operative situation. The paper proposes several interesting
   visualization concepts tailored for multi-source spatial and temporal
   data.

Significance/Novelty: How To Improve? 

   It would be interesting if an additional visualization of brain regions
   in the context of the canal view and/or electrode close up visualization
   would increase acceptance and spatial orientations within these
   visualizations. Labeled brain regions should be available at no cost, as
   a Tailarach coordinate system has to be established anyhow during the
   planning phase.

Exposition and Detail

   Somewhat

Exposition and Detail: How To Improve?

   The paper is well written and motivated. The methods are completely
   described and should be reproducible by any graduate student after an
   introductory course into medical visualization and (volume) rendering. 
   Nevertheless, sometimes almost too much information is given (if this is
   possible ;o) ) which distracted at least me from the real relevant
   points..... Thus, sometime less is more and I propose to revise the paper
   under this aspect.

Paper Length

   From my point of view the paper is too long and could be shorten by at
   least one page without loosing important information or harming its
   clarity. 

   Proposals for shortening:
   Section 4.3.1 "MER Signal Analysis" has not a direct relation to the
   visualization. It is a preprocessing method for the signal and can be
   replaced by any other suitable method. The authors should consider to
   submit this data pre-processing part as separate work. 
   The information in Section 4.1 and 4.2-4.4 is partly redundant.
   General remark: many parts of the paper could be formulated much more
   focussed... 


Limitations and Drawbacks

   I would have expected a more clear analysis and formulation of the
   requirements. What information should be exactly delivered by the
   visualization in each phase? The canal view for instance is quite
   unmotivated from my point of view and why one needs the spatial 3D
   context in the electrode close up visualization (Fig. 11) is also
   unclear. 

Method Evaluation 

   The formulated goal of the paper (section 4, first sentence) is "[] to
   increase efficiency and, more importantly, the effectiveness of the
   neurosurgical team during DBS interventions []". Based on this, I
   expected a more in depth evaluation of the system in respect to exactly
   these goals. Unfortunately, the present evaluation of the paper does not
   directly established experiments and measure to evaluate efficiency and
   effectiveness of the team but restricts the evaluation to pure user
   feedback on HCI design. The experiment is not clearly described (which
   setup? which data? any repetitions?) which makes a clear discussion of
   the results of the questionnaire difficult. 

References

   There is at least one significant work missing: 

   S. Miocinovic, A. M. Noecker, C. B. Maks, C. R. Butson, and C. C.
   McIntyre. Cicerone: stereotactic neurophysiological recording and deep
   brain stimulation electrode placement software system. Acta Neurochir
   Suppl (2007) 97(2): 561–567

   The authors cite another paper of Miocinovic et al. and mention that the
   proposed method is restricted to non-human primates. This is not true as
   in the paper above the system has been adapted to human DBS procedures. 
   This paper can be considered as one of the closest works to the paper
   under review and should be therefore cited. 



Final Judgment: Overall rating

   4  (<b>Probably accept:</b> This paper will be acceptable with minor changes.)

Final Judgment: Justification

   All in all this is a valuable paper suitable for publication at SciVis.
   Although there are some drawbacks and shortcomings (paper length,
   evaluation, clarity of requirements) I vote for its publication at SciVis
   after careful revision. The very short and a bit superficial evaluation
   of the method is acceptable to a certain extend, as clinical tests during
   real DBS interventions are difficult to realize and will be addressed by
   the authors in future work.

Ultimate Judgment

   

Expertise

   3  (Expert)


